Another birthday without GF. Wojak wanted to change his life. Now or never. He went to a park in the city and intended to speak to every individual he encountered. He didn't follow through. But he spoke to everyone carrying an interesting item or wearing an accessory. One day he spotted a frog carrying what looked like a violin or guitar in a case. Wojak inquired: "Which instrument is that?" - "It's my cello" replied the frog. - "Are you taking cello lessons?" - "I just had another lesson, indeed. Why?" - "I'm just curious. What is your name?" - "Pepe" said the frog. - "What a nice name." - "Thank you." Wojak and Pepe kept talking for several minutes. All of a sudden a group of protestors appeared at the entrance of the park. They carried banners such as "We're the nonbinaries" and "Boycott Peterson". Wojak was taken aback. "What does nonbinaries mean?" - "I think they want to make people believe in more than 2 genders. I watched a documentary called Hjernevask, that means brainwash in Norwegian, where such people were interviewed. - "Ah it's that group of transgender people and other misfits?" - "Exactly. In that series they talked about one case. These extremists tried to make Victor into Victoria at a young age and mutilated his body. He was never asked and looked extremely broken. And now these people are protesting for more rights to surgically manipulate little kids? I can't stand it. I think it's time to take responsibility in our own hands. - "What are you going to do?" inquired Wojak.
"I want to stop them from poisoning the minds of people, especially naive students. I wish I could do something right now." Pepe retorted. - "But they are too many. And you are carrying your cello. There's no point in picking a fight here." - "I suppose you are right. You say they are so many. But we are the silent majority. And the silent majority needs to gather and point out the transgressions of such radicals." - "You mean we should organize a counter-protest." stated Wojak. - "Protests are a thing of the 20th century. We need to connect our brightests minds on the internet. And win the war for the hearts and minds of the people who stare at the screen every day without critical thinking." Pepe asked Wojak for his phone number and they went their separate ways. The frog told himself that the extremists might have won this battle but he would plan for the next battle and the war. He reached his house, put down his cello and jacket. And put white papers and a pen on his desk.

by switzerlandball
